Initial version of Analyzers specs (#9853)
dotnet/msbuild: documentation/specs/proposed/BuildCheck-Architecture.md

* BuildCheck will need to recognize custom analyzers packages during the evaluation time - so some basic code related to BuildCheck will need to be present in the worker node.
* Presence in worker node (as part of the `RequestBuilder`), will allow inbox analyzers to agile leverage data not available within `BuildEventArgs` (while data prooved to be useful should over time be exposed to `BuildEventArgs`)

## Handling the Distributed Model

We want to get some benefits (mostly inbox analyzers agility) from hosting BuildCheck infrastructure in worker nodes, but foremost we should prevent leaking the details of this model into public API and OM, until we are sure we cannot achive all goals from just entrypoint node from `BuildEventArgs` (which will likely never happen - as the build should be fully reconstructable from the `BuildEventArgs`).

How we'll internally handle the distributed model:
* Each node will have just a single instance of infrastructure (`IBuildCheckManager`) available (registered via the MSBuild DI - `IBuildComponentHost`). This applies to a entrypoint node with inproc worker node as well.

> * Entrypoint node will have an MSBuild `ILogger` registered that will enable communicating information from worker nodes BuildCheck module to the entrypoint node BuildCheck module - namely:

Author: Correct - it's an implementation detail.
But it feels as an important detail for the dev document - it implies how we are going to obtain the data, what type (BuildEventArgs) and that they are going to be distributed in serial manner.

    * Acquisition module from worker node will be able to communicated to the entrypoint node that it encountered `PackageReference` for particular analyzer and that it should be loaded and instantiated in the main node.
    * Tracing module will be able to send perf stats from current worker node and aggregate al of those together in the main node.
    * Theoretical execution-data-only sourcing inbox analyzer will be able to aggregate data from the whole build context (again - we should use this only for agility purposes, but shoot for analyzer that needs presence only in entrypoint node). The way to do that can be via being present in all worker nodes, sending a specific type of 'in progress result' BuildEventArgs and aggreggating those intermediary results in the single instance running in the main node.

> * Apart from the scenarios above - the BuildCheck infrastructure modules in individual nodes should be able to function independently (namely - load the inbox analyzers that should live in nodes; send the analyzers reports via logging infrastructure; load user configuration from `.editorconfig` and decide on need to enable/disable/configure particular analyzers).

Author: Correct - "single node only" is the model for custom analyzers in v1 - so that we do not spill out internal details that might get irrelevant later on.

Let me mention it explicitly here.

* Communication from main to worker node between BuildCheck infra modules is not planned.

## Analyzers Lifecycle

Planned model:

> * Analyzers factories get registered with the BuildCheck infrastructure (`BuildCheckManager`)

Reviewer: Is there a better name than `BuildCheckManager`? I feel like class names ending with `*Manager` can generally be given more descriptive names.

What about BuildCheck does it manage?

Author: It serves as the pluged component into the build that receives events and data from the build and based on those de/registers, instantiates, re/configures, runs the actual analyzer instances. So `BuildCheckEngine` or `BuildCheckInfrastructure` were another ideas - but that feels equaly broad.

Other option is no suffix - as `BuildCheck` was originaly meant as the codename for the module within the MSBuild that hosts `BuildAnalyzer`s. But if we are inclining to use the term `BuildCheck` for the later term - this would be out of question.

    * For inbox analyzers - this happens on startup.

>     * For custom analyzers - this happens on connecting `ILogger` instance in entrypoint node receives acquistion event (`BuildCheckAcquisitionEventArgs`). This event is being sent by worker node as soon as it hits a special marker (a magic property function call) during early evaluation. Loading is not porcessed by worker node as currently we want custom analyzers only in the main node (as they will be only given data proxied from BuildEventArgs).

Author: The main reason is that we want it to happen on the main node - we do not want to load custom analyzers in worker nodes.

BUT - this would work only if we wouldn't need to configure BuildRequests based on actual analyzers - I'll need to have offline deep dive with you to find out the best way.

The actual OM exposed to users will be translating/mapping/proxying the underlying MSBuild OM and hence the implementation details and actual extent of the data (whether internal or public) will be hidden.

## Execution Modes

**Replay Mode** - so that users can choose to perform analyses post build, without impacting the performance of the build. And so that some level of analysis can be run on artifacts from builds produced by older versions of MSBuild.

**Live mode** - this is what users are used to from compilation analyses. Integrating into build execution will as well help driving adoption by opting-in users by default to some level of checking and hence exposing them to the feature.

## Live Mode Hosting

Prerequisites: [MSBuild Nodes Orchestration](../../wiki/Nodes-Orchestration.md#orchestration)

The BuildCheck infrastructure will be prepared to be available concurrently within the `scheduler node` as well as in the additional `worker nodes`. There are 2 reasons for this:
* BuildCheck will need to recognize custom analyzers packages during the evaluation time - so some basic code related to BuildCheck will need to be present in the worker node.

> * Presence in worker node (as part of the `RequestBuilder`), will allow inbox analyzers to agile leverage data not available within `BuildEventArgs` (while data prooved to be useful should over time be exposed to `BuildEventArgs`)

Reviewer 2: nit: Typo "prooved".

## Handling the Distributed Model

We want to get some benefits (mostly inbox analyzers agility) from hosting BuildCheck infrastructure in worker nodes, but foremost we should prevent leaking the details of this model into public API and OM, until we are sure we cannot achive all goals from just scheduler node from `BuildEventArgs` (which will likely never happen - as the build should be fully reconstructable from the `BuildEventArgs`).

How we'll internally handle the distributed model:
* Each node will have just a single instance of infrastructure (`IBuildCheckManager`) available (registered via the MSBuild DI - `IBuildComponentHost`). This applies to a scheduler node with inproc worker node as well.
* Scheduler node will have an MSBuild `ILogger` registered that will enable communicating information from worker nodes BuildCheck module to the scheduler node BuildCheck module - namely:

>     * Acquisition module from worker node will be able to communicated to the scheduler node that it encountered `PackageReference` for particular analyzer and that it should be loaded and instantiated in the main node.

Reviewer 2: nit: Typo "communicated".

>     * Tracing module will be able to send perf stats from current worker node and aggregate al of those together in the main node.

Reviewer 2: nit: Typo "al".

* Apart from the scenarios above - the BuildCheck infrastructure modules in individual nodes should be able to function independently (namely - load the inbox analyzers that should live in nodes; send the analyzers reports via logging infrastructure; load user configuration from `.editorconfig` and decide on need to enable/disable/configure particular analyzers).
* The custom analyzers will be hosted only in the main node - and hence the distributed model will be fully hidden from them. This might be a subject for revision in future versions.
* Communication from main to worker node between BuildCheck infra modules is not planned (this might be revisited - even for the V1).

## Analyzers Lifecycle

Planned model:
* Analyzers factories get registered with the BuildCheck infrastructure (`BuildCheckManager`)
    * For inbox analyzers - this happens on startup.

>     * For custom analyzers - this happens on connecting `ILogger` instance in scheduler node receives acquistion event (`BuildCheckAcquisitionEventArgs`). This event is being sent by worker node as soon as it hits a special marker (a magic property function call) during early evaluation. Loading is not porcessed by worker node as currently we want custom analyzers only in the main node (as they will be only given data proxied from BuildEventArgs).

Reviewer 2: nit: Typo "porcessed".

    The `BuildCheckAcquisitionEventArgs` should be sent prior `ProjectEvaluationStartedEventArgs` (buffering will need to take place), or main node will need to replay some initial data after custom analyzer is registered.
* `BuildCheckManager` receives info about new project starting to be build
    * On scheduler node the information is sourced from `ProjectEvaluationStartedEventArgs`
    * On worker node this is received from `RequestBuilder.BuildProject`
* `BuildCheckManager` calls Configuration module and gets information for all analyzers in it's registry
    * Analyzers with issues in configuration (communicated via `BuildCheckConfigurationException`) will issue an error and then be deregistered for the rest of the build.
    * Global configuration issue (communicated via `BuildCheckConfigurationException`) will issue an error and then entirely disable BuildCheck.

> * `BuildCheckManager` instantiates all newly enabled analyzers and updates configuration for all allready instantiated analyzers.

Reviewer 2: nit: Typo "allready".

# BuildCheck - Architecture and Implementation Spec

This is an internal engineering document. For general overview and user point of view - please check the [BuildCheck - Design Spec](BuildCheck.md).

# Areas of Ownership

| Area     |      Owner     |
|----------|:-------------|
| PM                  | @baronfel |
| Advisory/Leadership | @rainersigwald |
| Infrastructure      | @jankrivanek |
| Configuration       | @f-alizada   |
| Custom Analyzers    | @YuliiaKovalova |
| Inbox Analyzers     | @ladipro |
| Replay Mode         | @surayya-MS |
| Tracing             | @maridematte |
| Perf Advisory       | @AR-May |

> # Table of Contents
> 
> - [Infrastructure and Execution](#infrastructure-and-execution)
>    * [Data Source](#data-source)
>    * [Execution Modes](#execution-modes)
>    * [Live Mode Hosting](#live-mode-hosting)
>    * [Handling the Distributed Model](#handling-the-distributed-model)
>    * [Analyzers Lifecycle](#analyzers-lifecycle)
> - [Configuration](#configuration)
> - [Acquisition](#acquisition)
> - [Build OM for Analyzers Authoring](#build-om-for-analyzers-authoring)
> 

Reviewer 3: GitHub markdown does a ToC automatically so you can skip manually maintaining it :)

```suggestion
```

# Infrastructure and Execution

> ## Data Source

Reviewer 3: I'd like to be clear here that we're going to have a mapping OM from the source to the things that are exposed to plugins.

## Live Mode Hosting

Prerequisites: [MSBuild Nodes Orchestration](../../wiki/Nodes-Orchestration.md#orchestration)

The BuildCheck infrastructure will be prepared to be available concurrently within the `scheduler node` as well as in the additional `worker nodes`. There are 2 reasons for this:
* BuildCheck will need to recognize custom analyzers packages during the evaluation time - so some basic code related to BuildCheck will need to be present in the worker node.
* Presence in worker node (as part of the `RequestBuilder`), will allow inbox analyzers to agile leverage data not available within `BuildEventArgs` (while data proven to be useful should over time be exposed to `BuildEventArgs`)

## Handling the Distributed Model

We want to get some benefits (mostly inbox analyzers agility) from hosting BuildCheck infrastructure in worker nodes, but foremost we should prevent leaking the details of this model into public API and OM, until we are sure we cannot achive all goals from just scheduler node from `BuildEventArgs` (which will likely never happen - as the build should be fully reconstructable from the `BuildEventArgs`).

How we'll internally handle the distributed model:

> * Each node will have just a single instance of infrastructure (`IBuildCheckManager`) available (registered via the MSBuild DI - `IBuildComponentHost`). This applies to a scheduler node with inproc worker node as well.

Author: Rephrased and clarified.

We want to get some bnefits (mostly inbox analyzers agility) from hosting BuildCheck infrastructure in worker nodes, but foremost we should prevent leaking the details of this model into public API and OM, until we are sure we cannot achive all goals from just entrypoint node from `BuildEventArgs` (which will likely never happen - as the build should be fully reconstructable from the `BuildEventArgs`).

How we'll internally handle the distributed model:
* Each node will have just a single instance of infrastructure (`IBuildCheckManager`) available (registered via the MSBuild DI - `IBuildComponentHost`). This applies to a entrypoint node with inproc worker node as well.
* Entrypoint node will have an MSBuild `ILogger` registered that will enable funneling data from worker nodes BuildChecks to the entrypoint node BuildCheck - namely:
    * Acquisition module will be able to communicated to the entrypoint node that particular analyzer should be loaded and instantiated
    * Tracing module will be able to send partitioned stats and aggregate them together

>     * Theoretical execution-data-only sourcing inbox analyzer will be able to aggregate data from the whole build context (again - we should use this only for agility purposes, but shoot for analyzer that needs presence only in entrypoint node).

Author: I tried to add more details to the whole description of the distributed model (lines 49 - 54) - please try to have a look if it is more comprehensible now.

> * Appart from the scenarios above - the BuildCheck infrastructure modules in individual nodes should be able to function independently (namely - load the inbox analyzers that should live in nodes; send the analyzers reports via logging infrastructure; load user configuration from `.editorconfig` and decide on need to enable/disable/configure particular analyzers).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Apart from the scenarios above - the BuildCheck infrastructure modules in individual nodes should be able to function independently (namely - load the inbox analyzers that should live in nodes; send the analyzers reports via logging infrastructure; load user configuration from `.editorconfig` and decide on need to enable/disable/configure particular analyzers).
```

* Communication from main to worker node between BuildCheck infra modules is not planned.

## Analyzers Lifecycle

Planned model:
* Analyzers factories get registered with the BuildCheck infrastructure (`BuildCheckManager`)
    * For inbox analyzers - this happens on startup.

>     * For custom analyzers - this happens on connecting `ILogger` instance in entrypoint node receives acquistion event (`BuildCheckAcquisitionEventArgs`).

Reviewer 3: Not sure I understand this, can you elaborate?

The flow is evaluation->special event->load analyzer DLL and call its `Register` method, right?

Author: We actually want to allow only the BuildEventArgs sourcing analyzers - so the anlyzer should only be loaded on the main node. So it goes evaluation->special event-> _collect the data from the event and send via special crafted BuildEventArgs->Receive the event on main node and give it to BuildCheck there->_ load analyzer DLL and call its Register method

I'll try to specifiy better in the doc

> * `BuildCheckManager` receives info about new project starting to be build

Reviewer 3: How does this play into the discovery-during-evaluation mechanism?

Author: BuildCheck will either need to replay couple events to the newly loaded analyzer, or buffer couple events during initial evaluation (most likely the former is prefered - as we'll most comonly load majority of cusom analyzers during the first project build).

I'll add the info

    * On entrypoint node the information is sourced from `ProjectEvaluationStartedEventArgs`
    * On worker node this is received from `RequestBuilder.BuildProject`
* `BuildCheckManager` calls Configuration module and gets information for all analyzers in it's registry

>     * Analyzers with issues in configuration (communicated via `BuildCheckConfigurationException`) will be deregistered for the rest of the build.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * Analyzers with issues in configuration (communicated via `BuildCheckConfigurationException`) will issue an error and then be deregistered for the rest of the build.
```

>     * Global configuration issue (communicated via `BuildCheckConfigurationException`) will lead to defuncting whole BuildCheck.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * Global configuration issue (communicated via `BuildCheckConfigurationException`) will issue an error and then entirely disable BuildCheck.
```

* `BuildCheckManager` instantiates all newly enabled analyzers and updates configuration for all allready instantiated analyzers.
* At that point of time analyzers are prepared for receiving data and performing their work. MSBuild will start calling `BuildCheckManager` callbacks (mostly pumping `BuildEventArgs`), passed data will be transalted into BuildCheck OM and passed to analyzers.

> * Analyzers may decide to report results of their findings (via `BuildCopDataContext.ReportResult`), the infrastructure will then perform post-processing (filter out reports for `Rule`s that are disabled, set the severity based on configuration) and send the result via the standard MSBuild logging infrastructure.

Reviewer 3: This totally makes sense but reading it I can think of one potential problem: if analyzers take time, we're likely to see events related to a specific project _after_ that project's final BuildFinishedEvent. That may confuse some logging, so  we should be super clear about it.

Author: Mentioned in the doc.

We might need to do some signalling and waiting before `ProjectFinishedEventArgs` and `BuildFinishedEventArgs`
